Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Peter Els. He is Professor of
Psychology and Science Communication at Beth Spa University. His
research looks at the behavioral and well being effects
of playing video games. And he is also interested
in me scientific issues regarding best practice in digital
technology effects research. And today we're talking about his
recent book, Unlocked The Real Science of Screen time
and How to spend it better. So, Doctor Els,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for having me. It's great
to be here.
So of course, your book is uh a lot
about, let's say a response to many moral panics
that people have been expressing in recent years surrounding
uh different kinds of technologies but particularly screen technologies.
So where do you think that perhaps some of
these moral panic surrounding, for example, the internet, social
media, uh smartphones and so on? Stem from
it's a really good question. Um I always, I
always tend to caveat the answer to this by
saying that the problem with moral panics is that
you don't know that you're in one until you're
out of it. So we always see them in
a retrospective sense. Um, AND I think it's important
to bear that in mind actually because, um, you
know, you, you never know because you never know
whether you're actually in a moral panic or not.
You just have to be careful not to be
just dismissive straight off the bat just because this,
you know, feels like everything that's happened before. It
could well be the case that something comes along
at some point that actually we need, we do
need to really worry about. Um, WHAT I probably
would say is that with the current concerns around
things like social media and smartphones, um, you know,
the evidence base isn't great as to whether they,
they actually do cause harm or not. Um So
it feels like a moral panic and certainly we're
going through the same sorts of motions. So we
see the same sorts of cycles of arguments, the
way that the rhetoric builds up. It looks very
similar to what we've seen before. Uh So that
very big caveat, uh why, why do we find
ourselves in this? Um It's a good question uh
because we, we, we keep finding ourselves in this
situation right here. Whenever a new, well, in modern
day times, a new digital technology comes along, we
very often tend to view that with suspicion, um,
and varying levels of concern about how this is
impacting people, particularly kids, uh particularly uh uh young
people in adolescents. Um I think very often that
happens because these things sort of really take hold.
Right. So before screen, before social media and smartphones,
it was video games. Uh BEFORE video games, it
was, you know, radio and television and all those
sorts of things that these are really disruptive technologies,
you know, they appear pretty much out of the
blue or what feels like out of the blue
to, to the general public. Um They take hold
pretty quickly and they become ubiquitous really quickly and
if you don't know much about them or you
have a particular perception of them, that's not, they
may be informed by ex expertise of use. Um
I, I think our default very often is to
view them with suspicion or worry and concern and
yeah, that's an entirely reasonable thing to uh to
do. Right. So the problem that we've got with
the big smartphone, social media debate at the minute
is that these things are so embedded within our
society and culture now, um everybody uses them. Everybody
has that sort of lived experience of not having
a good time on your phone at some point.
And for some people that's really serious, right? Some
people just really horrible things that happen out there.
Uh Nobody is saying that that doesn't happen, but
for most of us, it's not that level of
extremity. It's things like, oh, you know, we wanted
to go to bed at 10 o'clock and we
ended up going to bed at 1030 or 11
because we were scrolling mindlessly on Instagram or whatever.
And that feels not great. It feels a bit
unnatural. We tend to focus on those negatives more
than the positives. So when you start really kind
of asking people interrogated people, you know, what do
you use your phones for? What do you use
social media for? Although those sorts of negative things
might come to, to light first. Actually, there's lots
of positives around them, social connection. Um For me,
it's things like uh meeting uh new researchers and
over the past 10 years, it's been a really
good way of generating new sort of research, ideas
and science communication projects and things like that. And
we tend to forget those things. But even like
just using a phone, you know, the, the the
sheer level of convenience about it, there are really
good things that phones allow you to do, but
you won't even necessarily notice. So, you know, we
don't really get lost anymore. Um So you don't
have the bad experience of getting lost and being
super late for a meeting or, or an event
because that never happened because you got there on
time because you were using the map function on
your phone. So those sorts of good things, those
convenient things we don't tend to notice as much.
So we all have this lived experience where these
negative aspects of technology use maybe are a little
bit more salient than the positives. So when people
come along and say smartphones are, are really bad
for us or social media is really bad for
us, we, we sit up and take note of
that because it, it kind of fits with our
world view really. And that's been true. I think
of every cycle of panic, technology, panic through, through
history, it just feels orders of magnitudes la larger.
Uh NOW with the current debates that we're having.
Mhm
So would you say then that people tend to
look at screen technologies in a mostly negative way?
I think we default to that for sure. Um
If you, if you ask people quickly um and
then move on to something else, you know, we
default to these very surface levels perceptions of, of
uh of screens. And I think one of the
problems there is that that is increasingly those perceptions
are increasingly colored by this very big debate that
we're we're having. So one of the things that
I talk about in my new book is this
idea of um the influence of presumed media influence,
which, you know, there, there's various interpretations of it.
And one of them that I take in the
book that I think is a useful one is
that, you know, we are told constantly literally constantly
now that screens are bad for us that social
media is really bad. Of course, that's going to
start embedding in there. So there's, you know, there's
tons of research from psychology that shows that if
you're presented with a, a claim or an argument,
you know, regardless of whether you believe in it
or not or believe it, if you're repeatedly presented
with it over time, you start to, it becomes
more salient, right? And then eventually over time you
start becoming more swayed to thinking that that's correct.
And we are literally told constantly that screens are
bad for us. Um So it's unsurprising in a
way that everybody was, you know, if you're told
all the time, screens are bad for you and
then somebody comes along and says, do you think
screens are bad for you? Of course, you're gonna
say yes, um straight off the bat. But when
you start getting people really thinking about it and
really interrogating how that technology works for them in
their lives, that's when you get more nuanced, more
rich, more interesting responses and, and data from people.
So let me ask you about a particular concept
that is relevant for this conversation. So what is
screen, screen time? What does that mean exactly.
So screen time is literally the amount of time
that you spend on screen based activities, whether that's,
you know, software or apps or video games in
a given time period. So if you're looking at
this from a scientific point of view in terms
of trying to do some research on it, you
can define it as, you know, how much time
did you spend on screens over the past 24
hours or over the past week or past year
or whatever? Um Or you can be a little
bit more specific. So rather than screen time, uh
you can say, you know, how much time did
you spend on social media yesterday or how much
time did you spend on tiktok yesterday? So you
can ask more fine grained versions of that uh
that question. But in the, in the research literature
at large, these things are all considered under the
general banner of of screen time. So, yeah, my,
my book is about that. It's about various different
aspects of of screen time. I think, you know,
in the 34 months that it's been out, the
conversation has really shifted, nobody really talks that much
about screen time generally anymore. We're talking about smartphones
and social media. But in a sense, they're the
same thing, right? You know, uh how much time
did you spend on your smartphone yesterday is basically
asking how much screen time you had. Uh And
you go to a lot of detail in the
book about why screen time is essentially a meaningless
concept for research purposes because it's literally anything and
everything, right? I think if you're saying that screen
time has an effect, certainly now given the level
of complexity of the debate and what we know.
And from the research, if you're still saying that
screen time is an effect has an effect. What
you're, what you've, what you've now increasingly got to
do is make an argument for why? Literally, I
know this sounds a bit facetious, but literally, the
screen itself is theoretically meaningful in some way. And
I think people increasingly realize that that's a bit
of a silly argument to make. But I don't
think anybody is trying to say that it's literally
the g the glass screen. Uh THAT'S, that's the
problem. It's the stuff that we do on it,
right? But even then, so smartphones are basically the
same thing. You know, there's, we don't, when we,
I think when we talk about smartphones, we talk
about smartphone bands and things like that. It's not
actually the smartphone that we're worried about. It's the
stuff that we're doing on it. So you drill
a little bit deeper and say, OK, well, actually
the thing that we're worried about at the minute
is social media, but then you've got the same
problem, right? So what is social media? How do
you define that? I've still not seen a good
consistent consensus definition of social media. I've seen people
try to come up with that and there've been
some really good efforts, but there are always things.
So, you know, you take these sorts of definitions
sometimes that um you think will just cover tiktok
and Instagram and Twitter and things like that. But
actually, if you look, if you, if you're specific
about it and as scientists, we need to be
specific about it. Um It also covers things that
you maybe wouldn't want to be worried about, you
know, Minecraft or the chat function in World of
Warcraft or Google classroom. Uh THOSE sorts of the
comments section on youtube, these sorts of um, software
and, and platforms, you can, you can define them
as social media with these sorts of definitions. And
it's interesting to me because um I kind of
get some pushback on this sometimes that this is
like a really nerdy conversation to have that, you
know, I'm coming along and saying, well, definitions are
important and we need to make sure that we
define our things properly. You know, people come along
and say, come on like this is, this is
derailing the conversation. Nobody cares about definitions. We know
that there's problems with whatever, but it's actually a
really important part of that because everybody feels as
though there's a problem going on, but we need
to define that properly. A in order to test
it and b in order to do something about
it. And I find it really interesting that when
you push people sometimes on that, you say, OK,
well, what is it specifically about smartphones? What is
it specifically about social media? They start to get
very defensive and very angry and aggressive. They don't
really give you a good answer. And I think
part of the reason for that is they have
this sort of sense, that stuff is bad, particularly
for kids, but it's not easily definable, but that
shouldn't stop us from doing something about it because
we need to, we need to protect the kids.
Um, AND, and I, it, it, it, it creates
a very difficult situation. Right. It's very, it's, it's
a very toxic environment at the minute. A to
even have the debate about screen time or social
media or whatever, but b to do the research
in it as well. So um yeah, that is
a very long winded way of saying um screen
time is, is effectively very poorly defined. Um And
that actually causes quite a lot of problems.
And what do you make by the way of
claims made by people and their research and public
campaign by people like Jinwan Ji and Jonathan Hyde
against screen based technologies. And in their case, more
specifically about social media,
I genuinely think that everybody in this debate. So
the scientists and researchers who are, are publishing research
and making arguments that screens are bad, the scientists
and researchers that are publishing research and making arguments
that it's more complicated than that and that we
need to think about this differently. I genuinely think
that all of those people are trying to do
the right thing. I don't think there's any um
anybody with sort of ill intent there, genuinely, like
all of the conversations that I've had with researchers
in this area. People are trying to figure out
what's actually going on so that we can do
something that works because I think, I don't think
there's anybody out there who says, who believes that,
you know, there aren't some bad things that, that
go on online, uh, that can be really impactful
and really harmful. Um, Candace Hodges. Uh There's a
really great quote from her from a, a recent
um recent article which is essentially that you can
take the viewpoint that the research on social media
and its effects on mental health is terrible. And
at the same time, you can take the viewpoint
that tech companies need to do something they need
to step up and design their products better. Those
are not mutually exclusive positions to take. And I'm
exactly the same. I whole both of those positions.
I think the research is really poor and really
conflicting in lots of ways that doesn't let tech
companies off the hook. There are things that they
need to do better and that needs to happen
really quickly. So there, there's another caveat for you
um in terms of the sort of research that
comes out that seems to suggest that there are
these, there are these links, my worry at the
minute with not just that research, but also the
research on the other side that suggests that, you
know, these, these links aren't, aren't as, as uh
as worrisome as other people make them out to
be. We're kind of fumbling around in the dark.
So if you look at the trajectory of research
over the past seven or eight years, 90% of
it is based in longitudinal research. So where you
go away, you find these big data sets where
loads of data has already been collected, really important
data sets and you find some questions about screen
time or social media or whatever it is that
you're interested in. You find some questions about mental
health and you do these, you, you do these
analyses that you think make sense. So what what
seems to have happened is that we started off,
some people have done some analyses and found a
correlation effect that looks big and scary and that
set the scene for the debate. So you find
these correlations, these links between screen time going up
over time and teenage happiness going down over time
and then somebody comes along and, and does a
little bit more of a specific study and says,
well, hang on that. I'm not sure that that
correlation actually means anything and then the focus shifts.
So it's maybe not about screen time anymore. It's
maybe about social media instead. And then you go
through the same cycle and then the focus shifts
again and it's maybe not so much about social
media for everybody. It's social media for girls. And
then on the other side of the equation we're
talking about literally, I think we originally started talking
about this in terms of happiness. Uh And then
that sh it bounces around. Sometimes we're talking about
depression or self harm or suicide rates or anxiety
or self esteem or body image. And we call
all of those things mental well being, but they're
very different things right now. If you sort of
take a step back from all of this and
go all right, if you, if you were trying
to de design, if if none of this research
existed and you were trying to design a scientific
study being the best possible scientist that you could
do, you could be, what do you start off
with? And the ancillary is to start with a
theoretical framework theoretically, why would I expect this thing
whatever this thing is to impact this aspect of
mental health, you're very specific about that you build
a theoretical framework by and large, that's not really
happened in this space, which partly explains why you
get this bouncing around this conflation of different ideas
that we try to make sense of a very
disparate area of research by saying what is the
effect of I mean today, it's what is the
effect of social media on mental health seven years
ago, it's what was the effect of screen time
on mental health. But those two concepts, social media
and mental health cover so many different things. Even
even if you look beyond the platform level, like
if you ask people how they use Instagram, you
get 100 people, you get 100 different answers, right?
Because there's so many different ways in which you
can use it. Some people are active content generators.
Some people don't make videos or posts, but they
comment on other people's, some people don't do any
of that, they just scroll um for their own
interest. Some people use it for work. Some people
use it for hobbies. Some people, you know, all
these and all of those things can happen for
the same person at different times of the day.
You start thinking about one social media platform. In
that way, you start to realize, well, talking about
social media in a general sense, doesn't, you're never
gonna get anywhere, right? Um Because then you start
having to think, well, what's the impact of commenting
on Instagram on mental health versus what's the impact
of using direct messages on mental health? Yeah, you,
you, you really wanna start teasing those and that's
sort of in a way that's an interesting route
to go down because, you know, again, theoretically, if
you found that um some of these mechanisms had
impacts on others, then it's not so much about
banning social media or getting rid of it. It's
about how do we, how do we design it
to maximize well being and minimize the potential harmful
effects and I think that's what a lot of
people are saying in this area, they're not necessarily
saying go away and do that level of research,
but certainly in terms of design, that's what we
need to be thinking about. So that's sort of
the trajectory of the research literature, one of the
things and also the debate as well. One of
the things that I struggle with here though is
that, um, it feels like certainly in the public
debate around screens, it feels like the replication crisis
in psychology never happened. You know, that was a
thing that happened 10 years ago. And we've kind
of forgotten about it because what's happening if you
look at the debate is people are shifting their
viewpoints, their positions all the time. I, I really
struggle with this when I talk to journalists um
about my book about, about this stuff, generally that
maybe the conversation will start by saying, you know,
what's your view on this idea that social media
causes mental health problems? And, you know, we'll have
the sort of conversation that we're having here and
then at some point they'll go. Yeah. But if
you look at the data on suicide rates, you
know, how do you explain that? And then there's
a sort of different conversation there and then later
on, they'll say, OK, yeah. But if you look
at um what happens with, you know, I don't
know, body image and Instagram, they're all different conversations
they're bouncing around and it becomes very difficult to
have that conversation because the goalposts keep shifting. One
of the things that we don't see in the
literature is uh much modern day research adhering to
um all the lessons that we learned from the
replication crisis, basically. So there are very few preregistered
studies in this area. Um There are very few
open data sets. There's, you know, when you ask
people sometimes for their data sets, even though they
say they're available, you don't get them uh which
you know, happens a lot in lots of areas
of psychology and science. Beyond that, you know, we
make these statements to say data is available upon
reasonable request, which is essentially a meaningless statement because
people are still very reluctant to share their data.
Uh MATERIALS aren't shared, uh analysis, scripts aren't shared.
Um HYPOTHESES aren't preregistered, all those sorts of things.
And we know from like 15 years of the
replication crisis. Now, nearly that those things, they're not,
they're not fixed, they don't fix everything, but they
really help if what you're trying to figure out
is actual, more convincing, more reassuring answers to things.
Those are the sorts of things that you need
to do and it's happening in some places. Uh
It's not happening across the board though.
But then with all of those limitations that you
described there, when it comes to these studies surrounding
the relationship or the link between um social media
use or internet use more generally. And mental health,
is there anything concrete we can say about that
link at this point in time or not?
Um So I think the most, so the best
that we can say in a, in a sort
of evidence based way at the moment is that
there are associations between social media and poor mental
health. So social media going up mental health go
down, but they're very, very small associations. Um And
there's this increasing uh and I, I hope it
becomes a more vocal, more noticeable point that's being
made in the literature that um social media is
one part of the puzzle that uh that tells
us something meaningful about mental health. What, what's gone
a bit wrong? I think with certainly with the
public debate is that it feels like everybody's trying
to run around and figure out what is the
main cause of mental health problems. What is the
soul or the route driver? And I don't think
that's the right approach to take because mental health
is really complex. It's always going to be impacted
by a multitude of factors that all interact with
each other in really interesting and sometimes counterintuitive ways.
So, you know, if you take it to its
logical conclusion, if you say, you know, we're trying
to find what's, what's the one big thing that's
affected teenage mental health over the past 10 years
with a view to if we can find that
convincingly, we can remove it from the equation. Um
You will not magically fix anything. If you do
that, you will not create a utopian state where
teenage mental health is suddenly fine because again, that's
not how mental health works. Mental health is complicated.
It's affected by a lot of interacting factors. It's
affected by an ecosystem of factors. Social media will
be a part of that. Of course, it will,
you know, it has to be, be weird not
to be right that it would be a very
strange thing if that had no impact whatsoever. But
increasingly what we're seeing in, in some of the
best research out there is that yes, it's a
factor. It's a very, very small factor and actually
there are other things which are not the main
cause the, the root cause, but they are bigger
effects and maybe we should be looking at those
sorts of things first.
But then of course, we've been focusing here mostly
on the supposed uh negative effects of social media.
But aren't there also positive effects?
Yeah. And this is, it's a great point because
this is absolutely where some of that complexity comes
into it. Right. And, and again, I've had a
lot of conversations with people ironically online on, on
social media where it genuinely seems to be the
case that the view that they're taking is that
screens are inherently harmful and bad. And that the
they, they're only that that, you know, you pick
up a phone and you log on to the
internet and then you're instantly bombarded with bad stuff.
Um, THAT'S not my experience of being on the
internet or being on social media or being on
phones. It's not the experience of a lot of,
you know, if you actually ask teenage about it,
that's not their experience either. It's way more complicated
than that. So and again, this is the thing
right that we miss in this, that some, there
are some aspects of social media, use of smartphone,
use of going on the internet that can be
really positive and supportive for mental health. There are
some aspects that can be really detrimental to it
and critically you, you as an individual can experience
both. So there's a really interesting line of research
that's been kind of brewing over the past six
years or so. That suggests that WW well, first
off our, our online lives mirror our offline lives
in really important ways. It's not to say that
they're exactly the same thing, but there are important
differences as well. But what that also means is
that sometimes you can see things that are going
on or vulnerabilities that you have in your offline
life can predict the kinds of risks that you
come across online, particularly for, for teenagers. Now, so
one example of this might be, you know, if
you, if you're feeling depressed and lonely, you might
go online on social media or wherever, to try
and connect with people uh and to try and
seek out information about how to help with, with
depression. No, that could either be successful or disastrous,
right? Depending on, you know, the, the routes that
you can take and, and this is what we
see in the research literature, right? So, so in
some cases, you know, you'll have a really successful
outcome day, you know, you'll find uh a really
supportive group of people or you'll find a more
kind of formalized support group or you'll find resources
that really help you. In other cases, you'll find
stuff that is really harmful to your mental health.
So maybe a better example here is if, if
you're um you know, if you're struggling with an
eating disorder and you go online to try and
seek out help. Um AND you find a forum
of people with who who are also dealing with
uh with eating disorders. That could be a very
positive forum where people are trying to help each
other. There are also horrible situations out there where
there are people setting up spaces to, you almost
encourage people to, to go further. Um So, you
know, which one you find has a drastic effect
on your mental health? Um There um whether, which
route you go down, whether or not you find
the, the, the supportive stuff or the harmful stuff,
you know, it certainly has nothing to do with
social media or screens, right? It has everything to
do with other things. It has, uh, you know,
things that impact that are, um, do you have
a support network around you? Do you have people
in your life that you trust and that you
can talk to and talk things through with a,
so you can get ideas and advice on where
the right places are to go. But b if
you find yourself on the wrong route, on the
harmful route, you've got people to talk to about
it. And I think that's one of the other
things that we don't maybe acknowledge as much in
the literature. You know, that's certainly a, it's certainly
a signal in the research literature that if you
come across or if teenagers come across uncomfortable or
what they perceive to be harmful content online j
because they've come across it, it is not necessarily
guaranteed that they will be harmed by it. Again,
other things will impact that so you can dampen
the effects of that. Um OO of, of that
eventuality again, with, through support networks through open communication.
Can they talk to their parents or caregivers, friends,
family about this and work it through and get
help that sort of way? Are they being trained
in digital literacy and resilience skills beforehand? So that
they know what a an identity theft scam looks
like so that they don't get defrauded? Um AS
an example that they know what sorts of sites
are appropriate and inappropriate for them to navigate and
why and all of those sorts of things. So
what you see then is this sort of you
start thinking about it in that way and it
immediately becomes more complicated, right? That of course, social
media can't be the soul or the root cause
of it in the, in the way that anything
can that all of these things interact. So one
of the, one of the kind of concerns for
me then is that if you, if you partly
what's happened in the debate is that we've set
off by going, you know, screen slash social media
are the bad thing, right? And then a bunch
of scientists come along and said, we don't think
that's the case. That's not what the evidence sets.
What that immediately sets up is a debate where
you have a back and forth where one side
then goes. OK. Well, if it's not social media,
what is it? And then people start suggesting loads
of things and we go through that list one
by one. Well, maybe it was the global financial
crisis. Well, no, it's not that because of this
reasonable argument. Well, maybe it was something else that
happened. Well, it's not that because you kind of
go through the list one by one crossing them
out. This isn't the main cause this isn't the
main cause you kind of don't you sort of
leave social media to the end. Right. You go.
Well, this is the only thing that explains everything,
right. It's the only thing that happened on a
global scale and it's just the wrong way of
looking at it because that list that you've created
all of those things matter in some way, shape
or form, they will all interact and matter with,
interact with each other and matter and have an
effect on uh on mental health or educational outcomes,
whatever it is that you're interested in and we've
just not developed that level of complexity yet to
say, look, this thing has negative impacts. It also
has some positives. So how do we, how do
we balance that? How do we understand that? And
I think that's why for me the, the, the
general framing of the debate, which is, is social
media causing mental ill health or is x whatever
thing you're interested in causing mental health, ill health,
it's just the wrong way to frame it. So,
uh and again, I can't take credit for this.
I think it's uh work by Candice Rodgers and
um and uh M and Jensen that this idea
that a better question to ask here is why
do some people do some teenagers, do some adults?
Why do some people really struggle online and why
do other people in seemingly similar situations? Why do
they thrive and how do we understand those pathways
to those different routes? And if you can understand
that, then that's when you can actually make a
difference, right? Because you can start to see well,
these particular aspects of the way that we navigate
the internet or the way that we use social
media don't work, they need fixing. Um And it's
much harder for tech companies to ignore that sort
of line of questioning and line of complaint. It's,
I think it's very easy for them when you
come along and say social media is melting everybody's
brains. Um It's just such a, a, an un
evidenced thing to say that it's very easy for
a tech company to say, you know, that's, that's
a silly thing to say. We're not going to
engage with that and that's what you don't want
them to do. You don't want to dis them
to disengage with the conversation cos then nothing's gonna
change, right?
So another kind of claims that people have been
making are related to a supposed association between uh
screen based technologies and sleep. And they say that
uh using screen based based technologies can ruin our
sleep, our sleeping patterns, our circadian rhythm, stuff like
that. Uh What can we tell about that from
the best research we have on it?
I, well, it's a good question. I think, I
don't think we have much good research on this
at the minute. So, um that's kind of part
of the problem I think. Um So there's, there's
a couple of things going on here. One is
that there's been this consistent thread again in public
debates about screens over the, the past at least
10 years or so that, um, blue light, so
blue length, uh blue wavelength, um in the light
spectrum, um impact and interrupt sleep. And there's a
biological mechanism going on there. And I should say
that's absolutely true. You know, that's, that's not, I
don't think that's controversial in any way. It's absolutely
the case that there's this biological mechanism that blue
light, um, interacts with sleep where it gets a
bit more shaky is that, um, screens emit blue
light, therefore, screens impact sleep in a biological sense.
Um, I went down a bit of a rabbit
hole with, with this question, um, in the book
because, um, you know, I, I sort of taken
the view that, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm generally
quite skeptical about many claims about the screens, but
I'm willing to change my mind if the evidence
makes sense. And I, and I fully expected at
the, at some point in writing, unlocked that I'd
have a chapter where I go. Here's this thing
that people say about screens that I don't think
is right. And then we look at the evidence
and that by the end of it I go,
oh, actually, yeah, that makes sense. That's good. But,
you know, now we can be more evidence based
on it and it didn't really happen and it
certainly didn't happen with sleep. Um, BUT there's there's
this weird thing going on here. Right. So, um
screens, screens do have an impact on sleep, but
we don't need to resort to biological discussions, biological
mechanisms to relate to that. So if you look
at the, the, the, the, the research, the data
on, on blue light from screens and sleep, I
don't think there's anything there. You know, if you're
worried about blue light from your phones at night,
don't be um, it's not having a meaningful impact
as far as I can tell from the literature
where screens maybe have more of an impact is
in two ways, two interrelated ways. One is literally,
you know, if you're not thinking about what you're
doing on your phone and you're just spending loads
of time in the evening doing something mindlessly, you're
on the risk of doing it too long. And
then the, the impact on sleep is you have
less sleep, right. So that's actually one important important
thing for teenagers in particular because we see a
lot of pressures on teenage sleep when they get
to uh being a teenager insofar as you know,
if you look at school start times they tend
to get um earlier in the morning. So there's
that impact at the end of sleep and bedtime
for various reasons, get later. So parents become more
relaxed about enforcing uh sleep rules. Kids have more
autonomy to do stuff and kids have phones. So
yeah, they're more likely to go to bed early
later and get up earlier. And that's a really
big thing because teenagers need, need sleep. But that's
been true forever. Right. That, that story's been true
forever. I guess the key question there is have
phones exacerbated the issue and maybe, yes, I think
there. But, you know, there's, again, there's really mixed
signals in the literature. Um, ONE of the most
interesting lines of research that I saw there is,
and again, we need to ask kids like teenage,
we're talking about teenagers a lot in this debate
and they are, you know, people are talking to
them but not many. Uh AND actually they're the
ones that we need to talk to, to figure
out what's going on. You actually talk to teenagers
about what they're doing and what's happened over time
is that there's this set of social norms that
have developed that there's an expectation that you are
available to talk to your schoolmates classmates online late
ish at night and they're aware of this, they're
aware that that's a problem, right? They wanna go
to sleep, but it's not because screens are addictive
or blue light is sending out anti sleep rays
or anything like that. It's because there's a social
expectation that they should be around. If a if
a message comes through that they should be able
to respond to it straight away and if they
don't, that has consequences basically in the playground the
day after. So if you're not on your phone
at night when the big drama's kicking off and
you don't know anything about it the day after
you're immediately isolated from that conversation and that can
cause knock on problems. So, teenagers are very kind
of wary of that. Um, NOT all teenagers though.
So, you know, you, you and you talk to
them and some of them are like, you know,
what, what's the, if, if there's one word that
you could associate with a teenager, it's rebel. Um,
AND there are some teenagers that rebel against this.
They're like, you know, I'm, I, I don't want
to be involved in that cos I wanna go
to sleep. Uh, AND, you know, there's all sorts
of things going on there. But how do you
fix that? Oh, it's nothing. I don't think it's
anything to do with taking away screens or banning
social media or anything like that. You need to
try and change social norms. Again, it's through digital
literacy skills that you talk to kids and, and
try and establish these appropriate norms around. You don't
need to be having those conversations at 10 o'clock
at night. Um, THEY can wait until the morning
or they can happen earlier in the day. Uh,
YOU know, instilling values around the importance of sleep
and, and stuff like that and how to use
technology in a more mindful way that aligns with
the goals that we have will help just as
much. Well, it will help more than I think
bands would because they provide long term sustainable skills
for kids. The other thing around screens and sleep
is so I talked to a, a sleep expert
from a book and one of the things that
really stuck with me from what he said was
that, you know, he sees people come into the
clinic and they've got sleep problems and they'll say
stuff like, you know, I, I go up to
bed at night and I'm really tired, I'm absolutely
shattered. I go into the bedroom and as soon
as I see the bed, something changes, you know,
I'm wide awake and he was like that, that's
a real red flag for me because what that's
saying is that you've developed a really negative sleep
association with your bed. So if you look at
like all of the sleep hygiene literature, it says,
you know, basically the only thing, the only things
that you should be doing in bed are sleeping
and having sex, um, anything else try and not
do it in bed because there's always a risk
that you develop in association with that thing. Um
So the classic one for us then is we
go to bed at night and we get on
our phones. Now, some of us and I think
a lot of us do that to help get
to sleep. It's a way for us to like
unwind and, and break the day and just sort
of wind down a little bit, you know, and
I've talked to people, they, they'll put a podcast
on or a video on not to watch, but
just to have like background white noise and that's
fine. You know, if that helps you get to
sleep, that's not a problem at all. The thing
is you need to be a bit more mindful
of this in, in, in so far as if
that thing that you're doing on your phone starts
to become more cognitively arousing more stressful, you know,
kicking in a bit of adrenaline or whatever starts
to stress you out and make you feel more
awake. Obviously, that's not gonna help you sleep. So
if you can catch yourself doing that, that's the
first stage to doing something about it. Um So
yeah, there's this weird relationship in the research literature
around screens and sleep in the, you know, what
we've not talked about at all is, is that
biological component? Cos I don't think we need to,
but we very often, um you know, all of
these conversations around screens, we very often feel the
need to revert to biological descriptions and explanations and
that's true of the blue light and, and uh
sleep thing. But I think it's also true just
generally how we talk about screens that, you know,
we say that they're addictive, that they're biologically addictive
that they, you know, they're a, they're a dopamine
machine or they increase dopamine and then that means
that they're super bad when you can explain the
way that people interact with digital technology and the
good and the bad without reverting to those. And
I think in reverting to those, you create problematic
frameworks of talking about them.
So let me ask you now about another kind
of worry that people express and in this particular
case specifically, I would guess that many educators would
worry about this. So what about the link or
the supposed link between screen based technology and our
ability to focus in the sense that it would
disrupt our ability to focus? I mean, does the
literature really support that idea or not?
I say these are all great questions and I
think the very frustrating thing probably for you and,
and, and, and the listeners is that very often
the answer to those questions is uh we don't
really know or it's mixed. So again, like there's
a, there's a disconnect between the big general conversations
that we're having about this stuff and what the
actual science could say very often, what you find
is that the big conversations are very certain, they're
very clear and confident that there is an association.
And then actually, when you drill into the research,
you find a bit of a mess um and,
and attention and, and focus I think is a
really good example of that. So and it's the
same issues over and over again. Um And I
know I'm gonna sound like a bit of a
broken record, broken nerdy record about this. But um
everything's really poorly defined in the research literature. It
makes it hard to figure out what it is
precisely that people are worrying about. So we've seen
loads of claims over the past few years that
um social media screens are a driver of poorer
attention spans. Uh And then sometimes that's framed as
distract ability, like increased distractibility, a decrease in ability
to concentrate or a decrease in ability to focus.
Now, actually, all of those things are very different
things. Certainly from a scientific, from a cognitive psychological
perspective, they're very different things. Um Attention le let's
not go into attention because it's, it's a bit
of a minefield, but, you know, attention is not
one singular thing. There's all sorts of things that
you can consider to be different types of attention.
They all have different mechanisms in the brain. But
yeah, I think when really, when we're talking about
attention spans and things like that, we're talking about
um not being able to concentrate on stuff. And
I think again, that's one of those things where
we all feel that right? We all feel as
though this has got worse that it's harder to
concentrate on things nowadays. Um Why is that the
case? Uh Well, one reason could be that um
screens are emitting distraction rays in some way, shape
or form or the way that we set these
things up means that it's eroding that form of
attention. Uh, AND that's the thing that people worry
about. Right. Um, ANOTHER thing could be that this
is what always happens to everybody when they get
older. Right. You know, I could probably focus on
things better when I was younger because I had
fewer things to worry about. Um, BUT if you
asked 18 year old me, I'd say that I
really struggled to focus on things like writing an
essay cos it could be a bit boring sometimes.
Um So it's hard to tease those things apart.
And I did, you know, I don't, I'm not
saying that we should be really dismissive here or
facetious because, you know, if there are real problems
there, I, I would want to know about them
and I'd want to try and figure them out.
But again, if you look at, if you look
at the literature, it's, it's not, it's just not
clear cut. There's, there's no good evidence to, to
my mind that suggests that our attention spans have
been declining over time. Certainly not in the past
five or six years with the advent and explosion
of social media. I mean, if that was the
case, I think our ability to atte like our
cognitive abilities, the cognitive architecture in our brains that's
developed over thousands and thousands of years and evolved
over that time. Um If it was that fragile,
we probably would have been gone extinct. Uh MUCH
earlier than this for other reasons. Right. So again,
there's a lot of like fear based, this is
a thing that we really need to be scared
about and we need to be scared about now.
Element to this. Um THERE is, there's a line
of research, um that goes back 1012 years, at
least that looks at this in the case in
the context of multitasking. And again, I think that's
actually when you really try and interrogate what people's
worries are. It's, it's this idea that, um you
know, we've got screens everywhere now and you're flicking
your attention, your, your point of focus between lots
of different things and that has to be detrimental
and it's supported by research. And that there's this
idea in, in cognitive psychology called the switch cost
effect that if you switch your attention between tasks,
there's a time cost associated with that very, very
small. But if that builds up over time, then
of course, you'll, you know, you'll see impacts on
your ability to do work. Well, there was a
really big paper that came out on that about
15 years ago and then about 10 years later,
uh a bunch of scientists did a meta review
on what's happened since then. And, and the sort
of sad story there was that there's not been
any good research to support it. Basically that you
find all of these, you know, you find some
effects showing that multitasking is bad, some effects showing
that actually, it's not something that you need to
worry about all of those sorts of things. So
again, it's trying to make sense of a very
messy, very conflicting literature that sometimes is presented as
coherent when I don't think it is one of
the, one of the things that really stuck with
me when I was, um thinking about this for
a lot was one of the big analogies in,
uh, cognitive psychology around attention is that we have
this spotlight focus. And that certainly is, is, is
almost like our experience of attention that, you know,
I'm focusing on this thing at this particular point.
And, you know, by and large, I'm not really
looking or attending to anything in the periphery. But,
you know, if something comes along, that's interesting, I'll
flick my attention to it. You know, the classic,
we, we always used to talk about this in,
uh underground psychology lectures. You know, you're, you're focusing,
you're attending to the lecture, uh, slides on the
screen. But if a tiger runs, jumps into the
room, you know, you're gonna look at that really
quickly and you're not interested in the lecture slides
anymore. But the, yeah, the analogy is there that,
you know, if that's how attention works, that and
you've got your phone on your desk and the
phone pings off with a notification that whatever you
were doing, you look at your phone and then
you're stuck then because you're on your phone and
it's very hard to switch back or even if
you can switch back, you're doing that repeatedly and
that's to the detriment of whatever you were doing
before. Um, THERE'S this line of research that that's
been coming up recently that I think is a
really interesting alternative way of thinking about how attention
works. That it's not this, you're not in this
like, tunnel vision mode, that's partly what you're doing.
You know, you have to be focusing on something
like. But actually, if you look at what's going
on in the brain, your brain is very good
at creating maps of your environment. So you have
auditory maps, but you literally have a visual map
at the back of your brain that maps out
what, what, what's what light's coming in and hitting
your retina. Um But kind of overlaid on this
is what we might call an attention priority map.
So you can imagine this is like a topical,
a topographical map of your environmental space with peaks
and troughs and where there's a peak on that
map that corresponds to something that's really interesting and
important that's worthy of your attention and where the
map's flat, there's nothing interesting going on. So for
me at the minute, you know, there's a massive
peak on my topographical map for, for my screen
and my camera cos that's where I'm looking at
the minute I've got a screen over here and
maybe that's a small peak. Um I don't have
my phone on me at the minute, but maybe
if I have my phone on my desk, there
might be nothing there at the minute because it's
switched off. Now, what affects that topographical map? That
heat map, that priority map is sure, bottom up,
salient sensory things. So, you know, if a bright
light appears on my, on my desk, that will
create a bit of a, a peak on that
map, uh because it's something that's maybe of interest.
So if my phone goes off and the screen
lights up, there's something but critically, those maps and
therefore our attention aren't solely driven by bottom up
basic sensory processes. There are also top down processes
as well. And what we mean by that is
things like um what are your goals at the
minute? What are your motivations? What's your prior experience,
your prior learning history almost when you've been in
this situation before? And things have gone right or
wrong? What have you kind of learned from that?
So they're gonna go into detail in this with
an example of the book. And I say, you
know, I'm sat on my computer writing my book,
but you know, this is a good example now.
Yeah, I, I, yeah, I knew that this interview
was coming along for a few days and I've
been doing some preparation for it and, and I
want this to go well, you know, I want
to feel as though I'm not stumbling over my
words and things like that and I want to
focus on the questions that you're asking me. So,
for me, there's a massive priority peak around. Ironically,
my screen and, and my camera at the minute,
if my phone was on my desk and it
pinged off. Well, I don't wanna, I don't wanna
pick it up and start reading the message or
answering a phone call or something like that would
be weird because you're recording this interview and, you
know, it does not align with how I want
this to go and what my goals are. So
if my phone were on my desk and it
pinged off, there might be a little peak of
activity on that map, but not enough to shift
my attention. So I think, thinking about it in
that sense and, you know, that's a vast oversimplification
of what's going on in the brain. Um But
basically, you know, you have these layers of different
maps like that, um going on there. You know,
if you think about it in the, in this
sort of sense, like what's going on cos we've,
you know, I could say all this stuff and
say, you know, attention spans aren't collapsing this stuff,
but we still feel really distractible still. Yeah. How
do we maybe explain that with that sort of
thinking then? Um MAYBE it's like it, it's distractibility
then, right? That uh and I have lots of
conversations with my, my students about this. You know,
they'll, they'll come in and for meetings with me
and we'll talk about how their work's going and
they'll say they're really struggling. They, they know that
they've got this essay in but they just, you
know, when they sit down to, to write it,
they just, they can't really think what they're doing
and then they'll start playing a video game or
something like that. And then the next thing, you
know, the day's gone and the first thing that
I ask them is show me your calendar for
like this past week. And most of the time
they'll say, I don't really use a calendar. But
when, when they do use one, I'll look at
it and there's just nothing in there. Right? And,
and then, and then the conversation turns to, well,
OK. Right. So say it's Tuesday and you said
to yourself that you were gonna do, you were
gonna work on your, your essay today, but you've
not planned your time. You've not got a goal,
you've not got a motivation there. You've just gone.
Tuesday is clear in my calendar. I'm gonna do
essay and it's a really stressful thing to do,
writing an essay. And it's not always the case
that you're writing an essay on something that you're
really passionate about. It's something that you're doing for
the purpose of passing a degree. So some of
those intrinsic motivations aren't there. You rely on extrinsic
ones. Um, BUT you kind of get to nine
o'clock in the morning. You've not prepped anything, you've
not planned anything. So, how have you been distracted
by something because you, you weren't doing anything to
be distracted from? Right. Um, AND of course, you
know, if I, I, I've been in that situation
literally writing this book where, you know, there are
days where I've gone. Oh, I've got an unexpectedly
clear day. I'll sit down and try writing and
I've had a terrible day because, you know, I've
not really, my mind's not been in the game.
Um, I wasn't really sure what I was gonna
write that day cos I haven't really planned it
and I find other things to distract me. Whereas
if you plan your time, you create those goals,
those sorts of top down factors will influence your
attention in that, you know, talk, talk a lot
with students about this, you know, block your time
out. Say, OK, I'm gonna work on, on Tuesday.
I'm gonna work on this essay for two hours,
but actually within that two hours, I'm gonna do
10 minutes of work and then have a bit
of a break and in those pockets of time,
I'm gonna plan what I do. So, you know,
I'm gonna start off by writing a structure for
my essay and you know what? They go away
and when they try that, when they do it,
they do really well. So we've become, and, and
ironically like technologies is a factor in that, that
I think we've become so reliant on technology as
this sort of convenience thing that very often we
don't see it for what it is, which is
a tool to help us. And if we use
those tools correctly, we're not distracted by tasks when
we need to get on with things. If we
use them incorrectly, we get massively distracted by them
because not only are they tools of convenience, they're
tools of entertainment as well. Um So a lot
of this is around being more mindful, more, more
reflective about, you know, what, what do you want
out of your time online? What are you doing
online? How is that? How are those two things
aligning? And if they're not, what, what can you
do about them? And again, you kind of see
that when we have this sort of conversation, we
move away from these very top line. Very scary
things around are our attention spans collapsing to thinking
about it in a more, what I feel is
a bit more of a productive and constructive, more
nuanced way.
OK. So in, in the interest of time, let
me ask you about just one more type of
claim that people make about screen based technologies. And
then I will have just one last more general
question to ask you about the book. So another
thing that sometimes people claim is that these types
of technologies can be addictive and there's, there would
be of course a lot one back here. But
uh what can we say about that? And by
the way, what does it mean to say that
something is addictive?
Oh Those are great questions. So um where, where
should we start with that? I think for as
long as digital technologies have been coming out, um
people have been worried about their potentially addictive uh
properties and you see that with, you know, there
were, there were concerns that, you know, when the
radio came out that uh people were gonna be
so hooked on it. You know, we weren't maybe
talking about it in specifically addiction terms. But you
can see these stories are, people are gonna be
so hooked on it. They're not gonna do anything
else and that certainly feels like an aspect of,
of addiction, right? That you start doing this thing
to the exclusion of other things that you, you,
you uh you did um previously. So there's always
been that element of these things. Um VIDEO games
has been the same and um internet addiction. You
know, there's a, there's a really interesting story there
around, I think it was about 1995 where there's
a psychiatrist in the USA guy called Ivan Goldberg
who ran a bulletin board system for other psychiatrists.
I was very frustrated at the time with um
the, the diagnostic and statistical manual, which is like
the American Psychiatric Association reference book for diagnosing and
listing mental health disorders. He was very kind of
frustrated that this th the way that things are
included in that the way that disorders are included
in it is, is not in a very kind
of critical thinking sort of way. And what you
can risk doing is like you can in an
unthinking way, come up with a list of symptoms
and create a disorder that just completely path pathologize
or medicalize as a normal everyday behavior. And he
created this thing called internet addiction disorder as a,
as a way of like s satirizing the uh
the DS M and uh and it kind of
backfired, right? Because people started getting in touch with
him and saying, oh God, I think, I think
I've got internet addiction, I've read, read through your
list and that's me. And then these like internet
addiction online forums. So these self help self organized
forums start cropping up. And then I think what
happens after that is that it becomes a little
bit more embedded in. I'm not saying that's like
the soul or root origination of internet addiction. But,
you know, you start to see people worrying about
this because whenever something like this comes along, there
are sort of two ways of referring to addiction,
right? One is the literal clinical sense. Um And
there's uh you asked about, you know, how do
we define that? Um I don't think there's a
good clear consensus definition around behavioral definitions, behavioral addiction.
Sorry. So, I think, um, there's, and, and there's
certainly not a definition that's like a single sentence,
right? There's lots of ways to think about it.
So generally think some of the best, um, definitions
of behavioral addictions, uh that I've seen are, you
know, engaging in, uh, a behavior repeatedly that leads
to sort of significant harm or significant distress, but
there have to be some exclusion factors in there.
So that behavior doesn't diminish over time. Uh It
persists. Um You can't explain that behavior due down
to other reasons. So it's not that it's a,
a coping mechanism for something else I think is
a really important uh aspect of considering a behavioral
addiction. Um HEAVY engagement or intense engagement in and
of itself is not a sufficient criterion. So if
you could have people who are heavily engaged in
that activity, but they don't always inevitably come to
harm that needs to be taken into a, into
account. And even if it is potentially harmful, is
it a result of intentional choice, deliberate choice on
behalf of the individual rather than this is something
that they feel like they have no control over.
So that's probably one of the better definitions that
I've seen of, you know, you could apply that
to internet or smartphone or whatever addiction. Uh And,
and in doing so what I argue in, in
the book is that um that we w you,
you're not addicted to your smartphone, you're not addicted
to social media. You can have bad relationships with
it. Problematic relationships with it, bad habits can be
developed but they're not addictions. So there's this whole
like clinical side of how do we define addiction.
But also we use the term addiction in an,
in an everyday sense, right? You know, we say
that we're addicted to things when we actually mean
we really like it or um we we do
that thing a lot and maybe there's a bit
of shame or guilt associated with that. It maybe
it feels like a bit of a vice, but
that is very different to full bone blow clinical
addiction, right? But I think what, what's happened in
the debate is that because we use those words
and in the absence of a good robust coherent
research base, it's inevitable then that you start to
think about this behavior. So let's go with smartphones
still. So smartphone addiction say you say we're addicted
to them, you start to think about that in
biological terms. So you start to see people say
smartphones are addictive by design because um whenever you
click like or click a button or press a
lever effectively, it's creating a hit of dopamine in
the head uh in the brain and dopamine is
involved in motivation and reward. It's involved in addiction.
So the more dopamine that something releases, the more
likely it is to be addictive. Now, that is
a a vast oversimplification of how dopamine works and
how, what the biochemical uh the bios, psychological uh
impacts and and mechanisms of, of addiction are, right?
And that all comes from research on like substance
use and abuse disorders. Uh And there are very
different things going on, like if you take cocaine
or heroin, that is very different in terms of
the biological effects, it's very different to being on
your phone or playing a game or eating or
driving, right? All of these things, dopamine will be
involved in some small way, doesn't mean that they're
addictive. Uh And, and you know, neuroscientists are kind
of clear on this, that, that addiction is complex.
There are really important social factors that um are,
are, are, are are crucial for uh for, for
the um introduction of maintenance of addiction. Um AND
that it's too simplistic to say, well, if you
like something, it releases dopamine and if you like
something too much, it's too much dopamine and dopamine
is involving an addiction. Therefore, anything can be addictive.
It's just sort of the wrong way of thinking
about it, but we've got stuck in that framing,
right? I see this people default to it all
the time like that, that social media is addictive.
Uh OR so social media is designed to be
addictive. Infinite scrolling is addictive, smartphones are addictive clinically,
they're not, there are no formalized, clinical definitions of
those things, the only formal clinical uh definition of
a, a behavioral digital addiction is gaming disorder. And
even there, there's no clear consensus on what it
is, right? If you look on the World Health
Organisation's own website for Gaming Disorder, they link to
a systematic review from 2020. And in that review,
they look at 100 and 60 studies that have
been published on this stuff. And across those studies,
there are 35 different ways in which gaming disorder
or gaming addiction is measured. 35 different ways, not
135. And in other studies, other systematic reviews, you
find similar numbers of studies but like even more
ways in which you determine a cut off criterion
for addiction within those ways of measuring it. So
35 different ways of measuring gaming disorder. And if
you look at the prevalence rates in that one
paper, uh they are anywhere from about 0.2% of
the gaming population meet the criteria for gaming disorder
up to just under 58% right? So what you're
saying, what you're saying there to me is that
either basically nobody has gaming addiction or pretty much
everybody has. Now. That's true. But yeah, the number
is somewhere between zero and 100 right? Not useful
to say that at all. Uh And what that's
very clearly signals to me is that we've not
got a handle on what that thing is yet,
even if it's a thing at all. It's very
unhelpful. And that's for the one formalized clinical digital
addiction. We're not there yet with the research on
smartphones and social media. So it's a mess, right?
And I think again, we, we've, we've fallen into
this trap of thinking about our digital technology, use
whatever aspect of it in terms of addiction because
we use it in that day to day usage.
And I should say, yeah, mobile games companies advertise
their games and they say this game is addictive.
It's great. You should. And I was like, that's
a weird thing to say, right? Why are you
say, like this thing is really harmful for your
behavior? You should do it. So there's absolutely responsibility
on the tech companies on this side of things.
You can't claim that games aren't addictive and then
say in an advert, this game is really addictive
when you mean it's great, you know, just come
on like do better. Um So yeah, there's the,
there's this like whole mess and we, we can't
help but think about it in this sort of
framework. But there are other ways of thinking about
how we develop relationships with digital technology uh that
are better. I think cos the problem with just
thinking about this in terms of addiction is that
you're left with a very limited set of solutions
which are basically stop using it various forms of
that digital detoxes, abstinence restrictions bans. Those are the
things that you're left with. Right. And we know
digital detoxes don't really work. Right. Um, BETTER ways
of thinking about it I think are in terms
of what we call technology habit formation. And again,
there's, there's lots of research, new research, like within
the past three or four years that is starting
to back this up and support this idea. Are
you addicted to your phone? Probably not. Have you
developed bad habits with your phone? Yeah, definitely. Everybody
has. I have, I know I have, I've also
developed some really good habits with my phone so
you can have good, good and bad habits. Habits
in and of themselves are neutral, whether they become
good or bad. Depends on other things. Right. So,
um, checking your phone, neutral habit, not inherently harmful.
Checking your phone at night when you're feeling really
lonely and you wanna catch up with some friends,
good thing to do. Probably a good impact on
your well-being, checking your phone just to see what
somebody's posted on Twitter while you're driving down the
road. Super bad habit to get into. Right. Definitely.
The more often you do that, the more likely
a bad thing is gonna happen, you're gonna crash
your car and you're gonna kill somebody. So don't
do that. But that's the thing, right? So, whether
a habit becomes good or bad or not, depends
on things like how frequently you engage in that
habit, but not just the intensity or frequency of
it. But how often you do that in a
way that doesn't align with your goals or your
motivations. So if you're doing it in an unthinking
way, then it can lead to bad outcomes. Um
AAA kind of more, perhaps more relatable uh argument
here. So let's say we're talking about scrolling through
Instagram inherently not good or bad. It's just inherently
neutral. I do that a lot and I do
that because I want to, because I want to
use that as a way of just winding down
at the end of the day. And some of
the, the uh moments in the past year where
I have laughed out loud to the points of
tears of laughter, uh where I've been scrolling through
Instagram and I've found a really funny video and
I've shared it with my wife, like literal tears
of laughter and it's been really good. And then
there are other times where I'm sat there scrolling
and I look at the clock and it's an
11 o'clock at night. And I said to myself
tonight, I wanted to go to bed at 10
and I feel deflated and I feel like I've
undermined myself. Now, is that because scrolling through Ins
Instagram is addictive. Now, what I try and do
in that situation is go what's happened here? What,
why did this happen to me tonight? And very
often what I find when I start reflecting on
that and start interrogating it is I go, do
you know what I've had a really stressful day
I, in and amongst doing work and stuff and
all the things that I need to do at
home and looking after the kids and everything. I
actually didn't sit down until quarter to 10. Like
that was the point at which I went, oh,
I could finally relax. So maybe it was never
on the cards that I was going to bed
at 10 o'clock because I'm not gonna magically wind
down in 15 minutes. So maybe it was the
case that, you know, if I wasn't scrolling on
Instagram for an hour or whatever, I would have
been doing something else. So I was always gonna
go to bed at 11 o'clock. But actually, you
know, in scrolling through Instagram, I didn't, I didn't,
I didn't find anything fun that time. I didn't
really get anything interesting out of it. So tomorrow,
if the same thing happens, can I do something
differently instead to, to help unwind? Uh And maybe
tomorrow that's reading a book on my Kindle which
is still screen time, but maybe it helped me
unwind a bit more or maybe it is scrolling
through Instagram, but it's just doing it with my
wife and like looking at things and chatting to
each other. Uh And when you start thinking about
it in that sort of sense, a few things
happen, I think one is you don't feel as
guilty or as ashamed anymore. And I think there's
a lot of shame in this conversation, you know,
the shame around people saying things like who are
these stupid parents that give their kids a phone
at whatever age? You know, they're sort of looking
down and sneering at people, the sort of personal
shame. You know, there are moments where I felt
guilty about being on my phone and I think
we need to cut ourselves a bit of slack.
I'm probably coming into your final question though. Right.
You know, what can we do? Um I think
we definitely need to cut ourselves a bit of
slack and just, you know, go, ok. You know,
we've all developed bad habits with our phones. The
answer to that is not get rid of them
because there's loads of good stuff that they do
for us as well. The answer to that is
how do we maximize the positive aspects of this
and mini minimize the, the, the negatives and the
potential harms. And the first step in that is
being more reflective, being more aware of what you're
doing on your phone. But feeling empowered to say
if there's something that I'm not getting anything good
out of, how do I get rid of that?
You know, I think sometimes we feel like, oh,
well, I don't want to delete my Twitter account
because sometimes I get really good stuff out of
that. And I feel as though I should be
kind of available there. Um, IF you're not getting
anything good out of Twitter, I'm just using that
because it's the first example that came out of
my head. Yeah, delete it and you won't lose
out. Right. But, you know, I know from my
personal experience I've had some really rubbish encounters with
people on, on Twitter that have left me feeling
really bad, but I have really good ones as
well and I still use it as a sort
of, despite everything that's happened with Twitter the Dumpster
fire that that's been over the past year or
more. I still find it a really good source
of finding new papers, finding new, um stories that
are relevant to my research and science communication interest.
So try and focus on how do I use
it more for that. And I say this in
the book, you know, part of what that's meant
for me, uh not just on Twitter, but online
generally is that I've thought really more about being
a nicer person online. You know, there have been
times in the past where I've said something really
snarky to somebody cos I'm frustrated with the conversation.
And do you know what? Never had a good
outcome? I never had something productive come out of
it. So I try really hard now to go,
you know, and sometimes I have that urge to
like dunk on somebody online, but I, I withhold
it and I post less online and I think
that's a good thing for me. You know, because
I'm making it work more for me, making, making
it more useful as a tool. And I think
if we can all do that a little bit
and it's not, it's not something that you just
do once, it's something that you have to do
repeatedly. You know, it's hard work, changing a habit
is not gonna happen overnight. It's like changing the
direction of a massive oil tanker. It takes ages,
right? Cos this is a massive, heavy thing to
turn around. You're not gonna get overnight results. But
what you will get is long term healthier, more
empowering results if you do that.
So you've already ended up at least partly answering
my last question. But uh let me still ask
you generally speaking, what would be your suggestions when
it comes to how we should think about and
approach screen based technology and even digital technologies more
generally without coming to the table with just an
assumption stemming from a moral panic about how supposedly
they are all negative and we should just drop
them all together and stuff like that.
So it's a great question. And I think the
thing that everybody has to remember is that the
these sorts of technologies they're not going away right?
There is no scenario here where we all stop
using smartphones or tablets or social media. What, what
the likely scenario is that the way that we
use them changes and then that drives technological changes
so that the kinds of tech that, that we'll
be using in 10 years time will look very
different to what we're using now. That's, that's just
how things change. Right. Um We, we've talked a
little bit about these sorts of individual things that
we can do, you know, re reframing how we
think about this, not in terms of addictions, but
in terms of habits, feeling more empowered to make
changes in that sense, I think is a really
useful thing to do. Um I think that's also
true of the public debate though more generally, the
thing that I'm, I'm really saddened about uh at
the minute is that, that, that public debate has
become very polarized. We're now in a position effectively
where people are so ideologically entrenched, either in terms
of the phones are bad or the phones aren't
bad. It's very difficult to talk across that barrier
that, you know, I find it very difficult as
I, I feel and I include myself in this.
I'm not saying that this is other people, although
it is other people as well collectively, I feel
as though there's been a failure of science communication
here that we've not taken lessons from the past
and adapted them here and admitted that there is
a lot of uncertainty around the research that we
don't know the answers yet. The science is not
there yet. We know what happens in other sorts
of moral planets. If you look at the, the
trajectory of research in things like the, the violent
video game debate, whatever, when those debates kick off,
they're very heated and very polarized. And the research
that comes out reflects that you see these very
big effects suggesting that video games are really bad
but using poor methodologies because everybody's rushing around trying
to do some research in it. And as the
research matures and as it gets better and our,
and the the methods that we develop improve over
time, the effects get smaller and sometimes they go
away and that sort of tracks with debates over
time where people get less and less vociferous about
this. You know, the best evidence that we've got
in the violent video game and aggression of debate
at the minute is that there are some small
associations there. You do feel a bit more aggressive,
playing a violent video game, but it's very, very
short lived and it doesn't have any impact on
anything else. It's not the thing to worry about,
but we're not really talking about violent video games
and aggression anymore, right? We've moved on. Um So,
and, and, but I feel like that's more of
an extreme thing at the minute that we've become
really polarized in this debate and that it's not
that people aren't talking to each other on, on
both sides. It's that they're, they're shouting, they're angry
like people are angry about it and I get
where that comes from, right? And again, it goes
back to that idea that I said earlier that
I think everybody in this debate is trying to
do the right thing, trying to get good outcomes.
Everybody wants everybody but kids in particular, but everybody
to develop healthier relationships with their tech like weird
if somebody didn't want that like they are, that
person is not part of that conversation. Whoever that
is, everybody's trying to get to the same outcome
where we all differ is on the journey and
on what the actual outcome looks like. So for
me, the journey shouldn't be about fear or shame
or guilt that uh because what happens there is
we start scaring people and this is literally what's
happening at the minute. People are going, this is
an emergency, this is definitely bad. We need to
do something. Now you put people into that panic
mode and they get scared and they lash out
and that's what happens in this debate, right? You
know, if you come along and say the the
research is complicated, people start attacking you. You know,
they'll start asking you well, who you're funded by,
you must be funded by big tech or Metro
or stuff like that. And just for the sake
of arguing, I am not funded by any of
those uh companies. I don't have any conflicts of
interest in that sense. Uh I don't have any
conflicts of interest. My conflict of interest is that
I wrote a book about this. So you could
perceive that as I've got a book to sell
fine if you wanna, if you wanna look at
it that way. But, um, so do other people
as well, right? Um, BUT they like, you know,
and, and I think also it's re it's a
reasonable question, right? It's a reasonable thing to say,
you know, who are you funded by? Because that's
part of the puzzle, right? So I'm not saying
that we shouldn't ask those questions. But I think
if we can approach this with a little bit
more compassionate, empathetic, critical curiosity, we would do the
debate a big service, right? And I, I think
this is the final point that I make in
my book that um it's very easy to be
very critical of something that you don't agree with
that. Something that doesn't fit with your worldview. It's
very hard to be critical of something that does
fit with your worldview. And I think we need
to be better at that when, when a headline
comes along or a new article, new p A
journal article comes along that says something about smartphones
and social media, whatever it says good or bad,
don't just take it at face value. Think about
what the evidence is to support that claim. Is
it a good paper or a bad paper? I
fully appreciate that. It's all well and good me
saying that people don't have time for this, right?
We don't have time. Every time somebody comes along
and says phones are bad because whatever we don't,
we don't literally don't have the time to go.
I'm gonna spend two hours of my day investigating
the science behind it. I'm sorry, I know we
don't have time for that. Um If you do
great, try and do it. Um, BUT if nothing
else just try and use those moments as a
chance to check in with yourself and go. Ok.
Well, I've seen this thing whether I agree with
it or not. Is it an opportunity for me
to think about the relationship that I've got with
my phone or my social media or use or
whatever it is just using it as those chances
to think about building better habits I think is
something that we could all kind of get on
board with.
Great. So the book is again unlocked the real
science of screen time and how to spend it
better. Of course, I'm leaving a link to it
in the description box of the interview and doctor
Els just before we go apart from the book,
would you like to let people know where they
can find you and the rest of your work
on the internet?
Sure. Uh Yeah, a anywhere really, I'm available on
most um social media platforms. I'm usually my handle
is usually at Peter Actuals uh or you can
contact me through my website, my website is Peter
actuals.com. Um Yeah, that, that that'll kind of come
through to my email. So, however, you want to
get in touch. I'm, I'm always happy to chat
to people about this stuff.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to do the interview. I it was a
really informative one. So thank you so much.
Uh Thank you for having me.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J Tom Hummel Sran, David Wilson, Yasa dear,
Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole
Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo, Stassi, Nale me, Gary G
Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward
Hall, Eden, Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Lati Gilon Cortez
or Solis Scott. Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson Chris to
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca stuffin, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumbo, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all